# HTML

HTML (Hyper Text Markup Language) is not a programming language like C or Java, but it is a **markup language**. This means that it is used to describe how content (text, images, etc) should be displayed *(normally in a web browser)*.

HTML files are just text files that you can edit with any editor. There are also available "HTML editors" specially designed for writing it.

<u>Let's analyze a HTML fragment:</u>

```
<html>
    <head>
    <title> Hello World</title>
    <meta http−equiv="content−type" content="text/html; charset=UTF−8">
    </head>
    <body>
        Hello <b>World</b>!!!!!!!
    </body>
</html>
```

As you can see, HTML is pure text. However some of this text is considered **hypertext** which is the text enclosed between '<' and '>'.

This hypertexts are called **HTML tags**, and they tell the browser to do something special with that text.

Some HTML tags have an opening tag and an ending tag. This is marked as <tag> ... </tag> .

Other tags however, are just composed of a single tag. 

---

The HTML document is delimited by <html> and </html>. In addition, the HTML
document is divided in two parts:

- <head>. This part is optional. If <head> exists, it can contain several labels like <title>, <meta>, etc.
- <body>. Inside the body is where the whole HTML document is specified. All text, images, etc. are contained between <body> and </body>.

On the other hand, we can also use tags to create hyperlinks to other resources (like other HTML documents). 
This is a fundamental feature in HTML. The **hyperlink tag is <a>... </a>.**

Example from an HTML code:

```
<html>
    <head>
        <title> Hello World</title>
        <meta http−equiv="content−type" content="text/html; charset=UTF−8">
    </head>
    <body>
        Hello <b>World</b>!!!!!!!
        Go to <a href=docs/otherdoc.html> another document </a>
    </body>
</html>
```

*And you can see how it is displayed in the browser simply by copying and pasting the previous code into an HTML document and dragging it into your browser. Of course it will not link you to any other document, as the path points to a document which does not exist.*

---

**Final remarks:**

On the other hand, blank spaces and new lines are called ”whites”. You can add as many ”whites” as you like to make your HTML file easier to read but browsers display consecutive whites as a single space. If you need to create
a paragraph, you have to use the labels <p> ... </p>. For paragraphs, the browser will adjust the text lines correctly based on the window width. If you really want to force a new line, you have to use the <br> tag. HTML has many tags but with a few of these tags, we can have an idea about how HTML works. Some more useful tags are:

-  <i> </i> Sets text in italics.
-  <tt> </tt> Sets text in teletype.
-  <h1> </h1> Sets text in type “header 1”. You can use numbers of headers in descending order of importance (size): <h2>This is h2 </h2> . . . <h6>This is h6 </h6>
- <hr> Prints an horizontal line.
- <center> </center> Centers text and images.
- <blockquote> </blockquote> Indents text.
- <pre> </pre> Pre-formatted text, i.e. spaces and line breaks between these tags are maintained.
- <!-- text comments... --> Comments in the HTML file.

