# HTTP 1.0

As we already said, HTTP is a protocol that uses the client-server model.

To start using it, we do need the client to know the server port and include it in the URL.

_How does it work?_
First the HTTP client opens a TCP connection and sends an **HTTP request** to an HTTP server. If everything is correct, HTTP server returns a response which cointains the requested resource.
Once the response is delivered, HTTP server closes the TCP connection.

*Note:* HTTP is a stateless protocol. It does not mantain information between different requests.

<h2>HTTP Requests</h2>

When we do have an HTTP request, the first line is the ONLY mandatory one. It contains:
- "Request method"
- Path to the resource
- HTTP version
Then it follows a blank line (to tell the protocol it's the request end).

The minimal HTTP 1.0 request is something like the following:
```GET / HTTP/1.0
[blank line]
```

**GET** is the most commonly used **request method** and it means "give me the resource X". After the GET we find a "/" and this means the resource we are requesting is the index file of the WEB server.

Another example requesting another file would be like this:
```GET /images/upc1.gif HTTP/1.0
[blank line]
```

In this case the client is requesting a file called *upc1.gif* that is stored in the HTTP server in the *images* directory.


<h2>Headers</h2>

Request & Responses can have header lines.
This Headers are text lines that provide additional information or functionality in requests/responses.

The usual format for Headers is: "Header-Name: value1, value2", ending with CR+LF (blank line). The header name is NOT case-sensitive.

Examples of Headers (the both are equivalent) would be something like this:
```
Header1: some-long-value-1a, some-long-value-1b

Header1: some-long-value-1a
    some-long-value-1b
```

HTTP 1.0 defines 16 headers, though none is required. Typical headers included in the requests are:
- From (email adress of the user who makes the request)
- User-Agent (name of the browser and OS)


An example of a request with headers would be the following:
```
GET /path/file.html  HTTP/1.0
From: user@example.net
User-Agent: Mozilla/5.0 (X11; Ubuntu; Linux i686; rv:24.0) Gecko/20100101 Firefox/24.0
[blank line]
```



<h2>HTTP Responses</h2>

HTTP Responses are also composed of text lines. The first text line of an HTTP repsonse is the **status**.

Typical status lines are:
```HTTP/1.0 200 OK
HTTP/1.0 404 Not Found
```

Let's explain **what do the numbers mean**:

The **first digit** identifies the general category of the status:
- 1xx indicates and informational message only
- 2xx inficates success of some kind
- 3xx redirects the client to another URL
- 4xx indicates an error in the client side
- 5xx indicates an error in the server

*Examples*
- 301 Moved Permanently+
- 302 Moved Temporarily
- 303 See Other
- 500 Server Error


Furthermore we can also add Headers to the responses. The headers typically included in responses are:
- Server (identifies the server software)
- Date
- Last-Modified (date of last modification of the resource being returned) <-- Used for caching


<h2>Final HTTP 1.0 example</h2>

Imagine we want to retrieve the file *http://www.example.com/path/file.html* using HTTP 1.0, the first step is to open a TCP connection with the server using the default port 80.
Then through this connection, the client can send a request like the following:
```
GET /path/file.html HTTP/1.0
From: user@example.net
[blank line]
```

And the server would respond with something like the following:
```
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Mon, 21 Oct 2013 22:29:59 GMT
Content-Type: text/html
Content-Length: 50
[blank line]
<html>
    <body>
        <h1>It works!</h1>
    </body>
</html>
```

Once the response is received, **the client closes** the TCP socket.