# HTTP 1.1

<h2>Introduction</h2>

*La diferència principal entre el 1.0 i el 1.1 és que a 1.1 és obligatori afegir un Header de **HOST**.*

The most important improvements made to the protocol are the following ones:

- <h3>Host Header</h3>. Provides (a more) efficient use of IP addresses. With 1.1, multiple domains can be served from a single IP address.
    For example, we could have www.example.com and www.example.net on the same server. Thus, HTTP1.1 must specify in the header to which host the request is destined. A minimal HTTP 1.1 request with the hostname would be something like:
    ```
    GET / HTTP/1.1
    Host: www.example.com:80
    [blank line]
    ```
    Where we can see the domain name (or IP) of the WEB server, and the port number (in this case 80, as it's the default port for HTTP).
<br>

- <h3>Chunked Encoding</h3> Allows a faster response for dynamically generated pages. Pages are divided and sent in chunks (fragments). This way, responses can be sent before its total content or length is known.
    
    When we use HTTP 1.1, it does send the body of the message as several fragments, followed by a line with a "0". Optionally followed by the page footer.

    Each chunk consists of two parts:
    1. A line with the size of the chunk in hexadecimal + CR + LF
    2. Data + CR + LF

    *(CR + LF == [blank line])*

    Example WITHOUT chunks:
    ```
    HTTP/1.1 200 OK
        Content-Type: text/plain
        Content-Length: 42
        [blank line]
        abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz1234567890abcdef
    ```

    Same example WITH CHUNKED DATA:
    ```
    HTTP/1.1 200 OK
        Content-Type: text/plain
        Transfer-Encoding: chunked
        [blank line]
        1a
        abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz
        10
        1234567890abcdef
        0
        [blank line]
    ```

<br><br>
 
- <h3>Persistent Connections</h3> A TCP connection _is not opened/closed for each request_. By allowing multiple HTTP transactions in every TCP connection, we can reduce the total transmission delay.

    In HTTP 1.0, TCP connections are closed after each request/response by default. As we know, opening/closing TCP
    connections requires a substantial amount of CPU time, bandwidth, and memory. In practice, most web pages consist
    of several files (linked HTML documents, images, etc.) that are located on the same server. Consecutive requests (and
    their associated responses) can be more efficiently transmitted by allowing multiple requests/responses to be sent over
    a single connection.
    In HTTP 1.1, persistent connections are used by default.

    Once the client decides it doesn't want to send any more requests, it sends a request with a Header which includes: "*Connection: close*". Then the server has to close the connection after the reply.
    If the server is the one who sends the header with "Connection: close", the client cannot send more requests, and it must close the connection after the response is received. Note that a server may close a connection before it answers all the requests.

    The HTTP 1.1 client can also send multiple requests through a single connection without having received any response (pipelining).

    On its side, an HTTP 1.1 server must store queued requests while it can not process them, and it must send the
    responses in the same order as it received the requests. If a request includes the header ”Connection: close”, the
    server must interpret this as that the request is the latest and it must close after sending the corresponding response.


    Finally, it is worth to mention that typically, clients (browsers) open several simultaneous persistent TCP con-
    nections with each server.

<br><br>

- <h3>Caching</h3> Headers to implement caching are provided with 1.1. This allows a faster response and bandwidth saving.

    All the responses (including errors) except the continue answers (status 100) should include the header ”date“. This
    header provides a time stamp which is used by HTTP 1.1 to implement caching. These time stamps use the Greenwich
    Mean Time (GMT).
    <br><br>
    There are two headers called **”If-Modified-since“** and **”If-Unmodified-Since“** that can be included in HTTP requests.


<br><br>

- <h3>Continue</h3> When we want to send a message with a big body (big file), we can use the "Continue" mechanism. This mechanism is used to determine if we do really want to receive a message or not, as if we cannot process it, we can save time and resources by rejecting the message.

    Clients include the header: **"Expect: 100-continue"**. Then if the server is going to process the request must respong with 100 (Continue) status.

    Note: A client should not send the Expect header if it's not going to send any body in its request.
<br><br>

---
<br><br>

As a final remark, say that **HTTP 1.1 clients** should:

• Include host header in each request. <br>
• Accept responses with chunked data. <br>
• Accept persistent connections or include the header ”Connection: close”. <br>
• Manage the response ”100 Continue”. <br><br>
**HTTP 1.1 servers** should:<br>
• Require the host header in requests.<br>
• Accept absolute URLs.<br>
• Accept ”chunked” requests.<br>
• Manage persistent connections (or use the header “Connection: close”)<br>
• Properly use the status ”100 Continue”.<br>
• Include the date in the header ”date” in each response (except Continue).<br>
• Manage requests with headers “If-Modified-Since” or “If-Unmodified-Since”.<br>
• At least, support the methods GET and HEAD.<br>
• Support HTTP 1.0 requests.<br><br>


---